---
layout: post
published: true
category : sports
title: A Long Run in Marrakech
---
{% include JB/setup %}

For our yearly pre-Christmas family trip this year, we decided to
visit the beautiful and vibrant city of Marrakech in Morocco. On the
last day of our trip I got the chance to do a long run from the hotel.
Upon asking at reception for routes to run, the hotel staff remindeded
me that it might not be safe to run outside and that it would better
if I run inside the resort grounds, going around a 1.5km loop.
Disappointed, I went back to my room to research the area on the
Strava. A quick search in Strava found a segment right next to where I
was. If it was safe for them, it was safe for me. I had to run
outside!

The hotel where we stayed was in the outskirts of Marrakech, right off
"Route 6", and the segment I had found in Strava was going from the
hotel into the city, while I preferred to run from the hotel into the
country side. So with Google maps and Suunto's Movescount in hand I
found a good route and started creating the way-points for my Ambit2
GPS watch to guide me during the run. But then, the electricity went
off!

At this point, nothing was going to stop me, so I decided to just hit
the road and figure out the way somehow, without having the watch to
guide me. It should not be too hard, as I knew that I had to turn
right after coming out of the hotel, and then just keep turning right
to make a large 13-15km loop. The key guiding point I knew I had to
watch out for in order not to get lost was for the road to make a slow
150 degree turn to the right between the 8 and 9 km mark. So I knew
that if I reached the 9km mark without such curve I should just turn
around and start tracing back my steps.

I started the run and came out of the hotel. Expectedly, the guard
insisted on me going left, towards the city, and not right. I just
ignored him. I had no interest in running in an urban environment.

And to my delight, in less than 5 mins after leaving the hotel, the
landscape became simply gorgeous. The ground was dry, mostly deserted,
with palm trees scattered all the way to the horizon. I passed only a
few houses, all built traditionally on thick walls of adobe, a mix of
clay and hay. The houses were most likely for the local shepherds, as
I saw a few flocks of sheep. Interestingly, I also crossed a few
luxurious villas along the run. These villas were dramatically
fortified behind high concrete walls. Through the secured gates, one
could peek in and see the large villas sitting in an oasis of
greenery.

What I found most curious was not to cross many people or cars on my
run, except for a couple of cyclists who politely greeted me with the
customary "Bonjour Monsieur". A curious sighting was a large group of
women that were waiting outside one of the villas, possibly looking
for a day job.

I was fortunate with the weather, which turned out to be simply
gorgeous. After days of rain and cold, this was a warm day, around
19C, in sunny and deep blue clear skies. On the way back of my loop I
took a picture of the road and the horizon. You can see the mountains
west of Marrakech, and although the quality isn't great you can notice
the snow at the top, in contrast with the typical winter light of a
sunny day in the Mediterranean.

![Views of the mountains]({{ site.base_url }}/assets/marrakech-run-mountains.jpg)

After 7.12km I moved from going east to going south, and at 8.94km the
road came to an end and I steered west. I seemed to be on track to
follow the route I had failed to create on Movescount because of the
power failure. A shepherd kindly confirmed that I was indeed heading
towards "Route 6". And after another 5km I met Route 6 and quickly
turned right back onto the hotel road. I was back at the hotel, coming
back from the left, to the guards' surprise.

The run ended up being 16.61km long. This had been a fantastic run
that I truly enjoyed. And I will be back to Morocco for more runs!

![Strava route]({{ site.base_url }}/assets/marrakech-strava.png)

It took me 1 hour 19 minutes to cover the route, and although the pace
wasn't great (4:47 min/km), I had a cold and did not want to die of a
heart attack in the middle of the Moroccan country side! The elevation
profile was mostly flat, so that helped for my heart rate to stay flat
throughout the run (but still high because of the cold).

![Elevation profile]({{ site.base_url }}/assets/marrakech-elevation.png)

Surprisingly, I did not get any HR spikes or dropouts on this run. It
is likely the dropouts and spikes are caused by electrostatic charges
accumulated on the dry-fit t-shirt I am wearing. Whilst running on the
treadmill, the voltage increases to the point of interfering with the
sensor's ANT+ signal broadcasting. This would make sense, since I have
noticed that when I run without t-shirt I have no drops or spikes. I
suspect that if I discharge myself a few times throughout the run on
the treadmill, I should not see any dropouts. I will try over the
weekend.
